Advances in AI and natural language processing have made the construction of knowledge graphs (KGs) from unstructured data increasingly viable in real-world applications. <CITE>
As generative AI (GenAI) systems struggle with tasks requiring logical correctness or reliability, the prospect of using KGs to perform fully explainable, well-defined reasoning is highly appealing: for example, a web application could convert user-provided natural language into a KG, and then reliably perform the correct action for the user according to ontology-defined system policies.
However, converting unpredictable, real-world data to a KG backed by a *semantically rich* schema---a schema that enables complex reasoning, such as an ontology making significant use of description logic (DL)---remains a difficult task, and actually performing complex reasoning on it correctly and efficiently is challenging as well. 
Reviews of neurosymbolic system architectures have shown that while many approaches convert data into KGs backed simpler schemas, or use ontologies and KGs as context input or embeddings for GenAI models, approaches that directly reason with semantically rich KGs, especially dynamically constructed KGs, remain relatively uncommon and more experimental.
We have identified the following qualities as particularly desirable for practical application of such systems, and which become progressively more difficult to achieve as KG schemas grow in complexity:

(1) *Reliability in KG construction:* As the requirements for correctness in a KG become stricter, the task of generating them becomes more difficult. Many KG construction techniques use large language models, which are prone to inconsistency and hallucination; methods exist to increase the reliability of KG generation <CITE>, but as the number of classes and DL restrictions increase, so does the possibility that KG instances will be assigned types that are either outright invalid, or simply inconsistent with the types of similar entities in the graph.

(2) *Flexibility:* Real-world data is often incomplete, messy, or simply ambiguous. Aligning such information to ontology classes is challenging when the ``correct`` choice of type for an instance is unclear or borderline; even manually created ontologies and knowledge graphs struggle with such issues. Furthermore, DL-based reasoning is strictly based on assumption of binary true/false, an open world, and local/global consistency; while these assumptions give DL reasoning much of its power, they also impose restrictions on how reasoning is to be used that practical applications can struggle with <CITE>.

(3) *Efficiency:* A user-facing application that performs reasoning in real-time needs guarantees of fast execution, and even non-real-time reasoning must be efficient when it is to be performed with KGs and ontologies of significantly large size. Restricting inference capabilities to specific DL profiles, such as OWL EL++, enables polynomial time complexity, and performing reasoning operations via targeted graph database queries can also increase efficiency. However, as knowledge base size grows, or the level of complexity required for reasoning increases, runtime performance becomes a major bottleneck<CITE>.

To address each of the three areas, we propose the method of scored semantic alignment. **Scored semantic alignment** is a method of aligning a KG with a relatively simple schema 
against a more semantically rich ontology: an ontology that shares at least some types with the simpler schema, but expands upon it with full class hierarchies and description logic restrictions. The method is based on evaluating each instance in a KG against each class in the ontology, and producing a score for each pair. For an 
instance *n* and class *C*, the **semantic alignment score** S(*n*,*C*) corresponds the degree to which the necessary conditions for membership in *C* are satisfied according to known information about *n*. The score can be **exact**, where 1 indicates current knowledge suggests *n* satisfies all restrictions on *C*, and 0 indicates some are not known to be satisfied--or the score can be **aggregate**, determined from the average number of restrictions on *C* which *n* is known to satisfy. The score is determined based on a partially closed world assumption (PCWA): it is assumed that all information about *C* is known, and that known information about *n* can be generalized to assume satisfaction of universal restrictions. However, to ensure interoperability with downstream reasoning tasks that may operate according to the open-world assumption, it is not otherwise assumed that if some assertion is unknown, it must be false. These semantics were chosen to allow maximum usefulness for KG construction: entities can be assigned types based on the degree to which the entities' graph context is structured according to what is expected for a certain type, but care is taken to avoid introducing unexpected consequences regardless of whether downstream tasks use the KG for open world reasoning (i.e., OWL DL) or closed world reasoning (i.e., SHACL).

Scored semantic alignment is intended to address the three qualities noted above in the context of KG generation: reliability, flexibility, and efficiency. With regards to reliability, it is intended to be used in the context of upgrading a KG of low semantic quality, particularly one that has initially generated by a GenAI model and assigned some small subset of the types in a targeted ontology. While the GenAI model may be broadly effective at parsing natural language and assigning types from a simpler schema, scored semantic alignment is used to assign a richer type schema. With regards to flexibility, the method allows types to be assigned based on scores, i.e. assigning only the highest-scoring type, or types that score above a given threshold, but it also supports assignment of *partial* type matches for downstream fuzzy reasoning tasks. With regards to efficiency, an algorithm for the method is provided that is fully parallelizable on a GPU, and experimental results confirm significantly faster runtimes compared to equivalent operations with SPARQL and Pellet. 

Contributions of the work include:

- A novel method of scoring the semantic alignment of knowledge graph instances against ontology classes, based on exact or fuzzy matching to OWL DL restriction-based constraints
- An algorithm for generating these scores at scale, compatible with SIMD execution on GPUs and analyzed for time and memory complexity
- An evaluation of the algorithm, comparing the results and performance of a Python implementation against equivalent SPARQL queries on Fuseki and reasoner invocations on Pellet
- A preliminary exploration of use cases for the work, accompanied by a publically accessible Python module supporting applications in knowledge graph construction, consistency checking, SHACL constraint checking, and inference production compatible with OWL EL and the majority of OWL RL.
